--------------------  what is UTF-8 in a html document and why is it used? ---------------------------------------------------------- 


UTF-8 (Unicode Transformation Format – 8 bit) is a character encoding standard used in HTML documents to represent and display characters from different languages and writing systems.

<meta charset="UTF-8">

The code above tells the browser to interpret and render the HTML document using the UTF-8 character encoding. The code should be wrapped inside the head tag.

Without specifying the character encoding, browsers may use their default encoding, which can lead to garbled text or incorrect rendering of non-ASCII characters on web pages.

Using UTF-8 encoding ensures that your web pages can display text correctly, regardless of the language or writing system, and it also future-proofs your content, as more characters and symbols are added to the Unicode standard over time.


It is used in HTML for the following reasons:

1. Unicode Compliance: UTF-8 is a way to represent the full Unicode character set, which includes characters from most of the world's writing systems, including scripts like Latin, Greek, Cyrillic, Arabic, Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and more. This allows web pages to display text in multiple languages correctly.

2. Backward Compatibility: UTF-8 is backward-compatible with ASCII (American Standard Code for Information Interchange), which means that any valid ASCII text is also valid UTF-8. This makes it easy to transition from legacy systems using ASCII to using UTF-8.

3. Variable-Width Encoding: UTF-8 is a variable-width encoding, meaning that it can represent characters using one to four bytes. This allows efficient storage and transmission of text, as common characters are stored in fewer bytes, while rarer characters use more bytes.

4. Web Standard: UTF-8 is the recommended character encoding for use on the World Wide Web. All modern web browsers and servers support UTF-8, making it a universal standard for displaying text on web pages.